# Protein trees

Gene trees aim to represent the evolutionary history of gene families, which evolved from a common ancestor. Reconciliation of the gene tree against the species trees allow us to distinguish duplication and speciation events, thus inferring [orthologues and paralogues](homology_types.md). 

Ensembl gene trees are generated by TreeBeST5. The process is summarised below:

[diagram of tree building]

## Details on tree building

The gene orthology and paralogy prediction pipeline has eight basic steps:

1. Load a [representative translation](http://www.ensembl.org/Help/Glossary?id=346) of each gene from all species used in Ensembl. We currently choose the longest translation annotated by the CCDS project, if any, or the longest protein-coding translation otherwise.
2. run [NCBI Blast+1](http://europepmc.org/abstract/MED/20003500) (refined with SmithWaterman) on every gene against every other (both self and non-self species) in a genome-wise manner. We use the version 2.2.28, with the parameters: -seg no -max_hsps_per_subject 1 -use_sw_tback -num_threads 1.
3. Build a sparse graph of gene relations based on Blast e-values and generate clusters using [hcluster_sg2](https://sourceforge.net/p/treesoft/code/HEAD/tree/). Hcluster_sg has a little insight about the phylogeny of the species (namely: a list of outgroup species), which helps defining pertinent clusters for the ingroup species. We use yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) as an outgroup (via the -C option) and the following command line arguments: -m 750 -w 0 -s 0.34 -O. See below for more details.
4. For each cluster, build a multiple alignment based on the protein sequences using either a combination of multiple aligners, consensified by [M-Coffee3](http://www.tcoffee.org/Projects/mcoffee/) or [Mafft4](http://mafft.cbrc.jp/alignment/software/) when the cluster is too large, or MCoffee is too long. We use the version 9.03.r1318 of M-Coffee, with the aligner set: mafftgins_msa, muscle_msa, kalign_msa, t_coffee_msa, and the Mafft version 7.113 with the command line options: --auto.
5. For each aligned cluster, build a phylogenetic tree using [TreeBeST5](https://github.com/Ensembl/treebest) using the CDS back-translation of the protein multiple alignment from the original DNA sequences. A rooted tree with internal duplication tags is obtained at this stage, reconciling it against a species tree inferred from the [NCBI taxonomy](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/taxonomy). See below for more details.
6. From each gene tree, infer gene pairwise relations of orthology and paralogy types.
7. A [stable ID](gene_tree_stable_id.md] is assigned to each GeneTree.
8. There is an extra optional step which calculates the dN/dS values for the orthology relationships of closely related pairs of species, using [codeml6](http://abacus.gene.ucl.ac.uk/software/paml.html) with the parameters found in ensembl-compara/scripts/homology/codeml.ctl.hash.

### Clustering

hcluster_sg2 performs hierarchical clustering under mean distance. It reads an input file that describes the similarity between two sequences, and groups two nearest nodes at each step. When two nodes are joined, the distance between the joined node and all the other nodes are updated by mean distance. This procedure is iterated until one of the three rules is met:

1. Do not merge cluster A and B if the total number of edges between A and B is smaller than |A|*|B|/3, where |A| and |B| are the sizes of A and B, respectively. This rule guarantees each cluster is compact.
2. Do not join A to any other cluster if |A| < 500. This rule avoids huge clusters which may cause computational burden for multiple alignment and tree building as well.
3. Do not join A and B if both A and B contain plant genes or both A and B contain Fungi genes. This rule tries to find animal gene families. TreeFam clustering is done with outgroups.

Hcluster_sg also introduces an additional edge breaking rule: removes an edge between cluster A and B if the number of edges between A and B is smaller than |A|*|B|/10. This heuristic rule removes weak relations which are quite unlikely to be joined at a later step.

### Tree building

The CDS back-translated protein alignment (i.e., codon alignment) is used to build 5 different trees (within TreeBeST5):

1. a maximum likelihood (ML) tree built, based on the protein alignment with the WAG model, which takes into the account the species tree
2. a ML tree built using phyml, based on the codon alignment with the Hasegawa-Kishino-Yano (HKY) model, also taking into account the species tree
3. a neighbour-joining (NJ) tree using p-distance, based on the codon alignment
4. a NJ tree using dN distance, based on the codon alignment
5. a NJ tree using dS distance, based on the codon alignment

For (1) and (2), TreeBeST uses a modified version of phyml release 2.4.5 which takes an input species tree, and tries to build a gene tree that is consistent with the topology of the species tree. This "species-guided" phyml uses the original phyml tree-search code. However, the objective function maximised during the tree-search is multiplied by an extra likelihood factor not found in the original phyml. This extra likelihood factor reflects the number of duplications and losses inferred in a gene tree, given the topology of the species tree. The species-guided phyml allows the gene tree to have a topology that is inconsistent with the species tree if the alignment strongly supports this. The species tree is based on the NCBI taxonomy tree (subject to some modifications depending on new datasets).

The final tree is made by merging the five trees into one consensus tree using the "tree merging" algorithm. This allows TreeBeST to take advantage of the fact that DNA-based trees often are more accurate for closely related parts of trees and protein-based trees for distant relationships, and that a group of algorithms may outperform others under certain scenarios. The algorithm simultaneously merges the five input trees into a consensus tree. The consensus topology contains clades found in any of the input trees, where the clades chosen are those that minimize the number of duplications and losses inferred, and have the highest bootstrap support. Branch lengths are estimated for the final consensus tree based on the DNA alignment, using phyml with the HKY model.


## dN/dS estimations

We only calculate these dN/dS values for high-coverage closely-related pairs of species, using codeml from the PAML package6. When the species evolutionary distance is too large, the saturation of the dS values biases the estimated dN/dS ratio. When the dS value of a given orthologue gene pair is too large, we mask out the dN/dS ratio, although the N, S, dN, dS and log-likelihood (lnL) values can still be obtained for all pairs.

## Notes and References

[EnsemblCompara GeneTrees: Analysis of complete, duplication aware phylogenetic trees in vertebrates. Vilella AJ, Severin J, Ureta-Vidal A, Durbin R, Heng L, Birney E. Genome Research 2008 Nov 4.](http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC2652215)
